==== PAGE 1 ====
 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine
journal homepage: https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/computer-methods-and-
programs-in-biomedicine
 
A real-time reconstructed grid method for soft tissue cutting and haptic
Liang Li
, Lai Zhou
∗,1, Xueyu Zhou
Pre-research Department, China Simulation Sciences Co. Ltd., No. 1 Kangqiao East Road, Building 2, Pudong New District, Shanghai, 201315, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Virtual surgery
Soft tissue cutting
Haptic
 
A B S T R A C T
Background and Objective: The virtual surgery system is crucial for medical training and preoperative 
planning. To address the issues faced in existing research, such as distorted grids, cutting with volume loss, low 
computational efficiency, and surgical tool penetration, this paper proposes a parallel data structure optimized 
for GPU computation. This structure enables efficient cutting with minimal volume loss and provides force 
feedback effects without model penetration.
Methods: This paper applies the Dual Contouring algorithm within the deformable grid framework for real-
time mesh reconstruction, which can be divided into surface reconstruction during deformation and cutting 
surface reconstruction. By precomputing all possible voxel grid connections and the calculation methods for 
the feature points of each mesh, feature point positions can be quickly determined within a single GPU thread, 
accelerating the reconstruction process. Additionally, the force feedback algorithm based on Signed Distance 
Field and the Finger-proxy model addresses the penetration issue when the surgical tool collides with soft 
tissue.
Results: Simulation results show that, compared to traditional mesh cutting methods, the proposed approach 
retains the non-manifold surface features at the cut areas during real-time cutting, and the frame rate does not 
decrease as the number of cuts increases. The use of the Signed Distance Field for collision detection ensures 
that the tool has both collision volume and force feedback effects.
Conclusion: The proposed method can handle interactive cutting and collision operations in various surgical 
simulations and achieves an interactive frame rate that meets real-time requirements, contributing to more 
efficient and realistic virtual surgery simulations.
1. Introduction
With the continuous evolution of computer hardware and software 
technologies, alongside iterative advancements in force feedback inter-
action devices, virtual surgery systems are playing an increasingly vital 
role in the medical field. In virtual environments, three-dimensional ge-
ometric and physical modeling of human organ models, combined with 
haptic algorithms and devices for simulated surgical operations [1], 
enables specific organs or tissues to be repeatedly utilized. These ap-
proaches hold significant importance for preoperative planning, train-
ing, reducing the demand for real samples, and mitigating the risk of 
disease transmission [2].
Interactive simulation of soft tissues primarily involves research into 
key technologies such as physical modeling, geometric modeling, and 
force-tactile feedback. The nonlinear, anisotropic mechanical behavior 
of biological soft tissues [3] is significantly more complex than that of 
isotropic soft tissues, making deformation simulation a prerequisite for 
visual and force-tactile feedback in simulation systems. The mechanical 
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: liang.li@csssim.com (L. Li), lai.zhou@csssim.com (L. Zhou), xueyu.zhou@csssim.com (X. Zhou).
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
modeling of biological soft tissues is typically achieved by establishing 
physically based constitutive equations. This process involves dividing 
the soft tissue model into smaller mechanical units and adjusting their 
poses based on local connectivity relationships to control the overall 
shape of the model [4]. Commonly used modeling methods include the 
Mass-Spring Model (MSM), Finite Element Method (FEM), and Position-
Based Dynamics (PBD) [5–7]. Beyond addressing the complexities of 
nonlinear biomechanical models, real-time modifications to the three-
dimensional topological structure of soft tissues, including procedures 
such as cutting, electrocoagulation, and tearing, represent a critical 
area of focus. Precisely replicating the deformation behavior of soft 
tissue organs during interactive processes poses a major challenge in 
contemporary research on virtual surgery technology.
In recent years, researchers have made significant progress in ex-
ploring various physical modeling techniques for soft tissues. When 
employing mesh-based methods, detailed spatial descriptions of mesh 
segmentation enable precise representation of complex boundaries and 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2025.109123
Received 20 March 2025; Received in revised form 24 September 2025; Accepted 15 October 2025
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
Available online 20 October 2025 
0169-2607/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 

==== PAGE 2 ====
L. Li et al.
internal structures [8,9]. In finite element simulations, achieving high-
precision soft tissue modeling requires high-quality mesh division and 
numerical integration, which demands substantial computational re-
sources. Consequently, the Finite Element Method (FEM) is better 
suited for offline simulations [10]. To enhance computational perfor-
mance and enable FEM for real-time soft tissue deformation simulation, 
researchers have pursued further advancements. Marinković et al. pro-
posed a simplified geometrically nonlinear co-rotational finite element 
formulation, enhanced by coupled mesh techniques, allowing complex 
geometric shapes to be modeled with relatively simple computational 
models [11]. For specific soft tissue organs, the Corotational Cut Finite 
Element Method can be employed, utilizing background meshes and 
multilayer embedding algorithms to automatically capture complex 
geometries. Surface details are derived from binarized images, bypass-
ing the complexity of mesh generation and enabling real-time needle 
insertion simulations for various soft tissues without requiring mesh 
conformity [12]. Additionally, by discretizing FEM and converting the 
effect of external forces on soft tissue deformation into a constraint 
estimation problem, deformation behavior can be estimated from lo-
cal surface displacement data, thereby improving FEM computational 
efficiency [13]. Compared to FEM, the Mass-Spring Model (MSM) 
is frequently used in real-time simulations due to its lower over-
all computational cost and high adaptability to geometric topological 
structures [14]. However, when simulating high-stiffness deformations, 
large time steps can compromise stability, and parameter tuning re-
mains challenging. To enhance its accuracy and stability, researchers 
have introduced a series of improvements and applied them to various 
soft tissue modeling scenarios. Duan et al. utilized a predict–correct 
method to refine explicit integration results, incorporating nonlinear 
properties and volume constraints to reflect biomechanical characteris-
tics and the incompressibility of soft tissues in simulations [15]. Beyond 
integrating MSM into traditional volumetric meshes, modeling solely on 
surface triangular meshes can also preserve volume. Hongly Va et al. 
leveraged the divergence theorem and implicit constraints to construct 
MSM within surface triangular meshes, achieving stable deformation 
and volume preservation while significantly reducing computational 
complexity compared to traditional volumetric meshes [16]. To better 
capture force propagation [17] and modeling precision, Zhang et al. 
combined convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with traditional phys-
ical models, incorporating biomechanical parameters and optimizing 
the model via neural networks to achieve heterogeneous soft tissue 
deformation effects [18].
In simulating soft tissue cutting, real-time coupling of biomechan-
ical properties with dynamic meshes is essential, requiring both high-
precision physical model representations and adaptive updates to topo-
logical structures [19]. Wu et al. performed physical modeling based on 
tetrahedral mesh structures, implementing liver resection by subdivid-
ing and removing tetrahedra at cutting edges. However, the triangles 
generated on cutting surfaces depend on tetrahedral size, resulting 
in coarse meshes that fail to accurately represent the incision [20]. 
Jerábková et al. used refined hexahedral voxels with the Marching 
Cubes (MC) algorithm for real-time geometric modeling and coarse 
mesh models for dynamic modeling, achieving cutting by removing 
refined voxels and updating surfaces. However, repeated cuts led to 
noticeable volume loss [21]. Fortunately, some volume loss also occurs 
in real electrocoagulation cutting. Berndt et al. simulated monopolar 
electrocoagulation cutting of soft tissues using Position-Based Dynam-
ics (PBD) and MC algorithms, dynamically adjusting the positional 
relationship between hexahedral voxel vertices and isosurfaces to ex-
clude specific vertices during surface reconstruction, thereby achieving 
electrocoagulation effects [22]. Yu et al. built on this by developing 
an Aggregated Finding Connected Components (AFCC) algorithm to 
address discrepancies between visual meshes and simulation models 
during cluster separation, avoiding ghost forces and visual artifacts in 
discontinuous cutting [23]. To produce low-loss cutting surfaces, Wu 
et al. employ a coarse grid for mechanical modeling combined with 
adaptive grids for geometric modeling, achieving better smoothness 
and visual quality of the cutting surfaces [24,25]. Chen et al. improved 
tetrahedral subdivision methods, employing progressive planar cutting 
while simultaneously performing optimization and simulation to ensure 
consistency between topological structures and force models, enabling 
more flexible cutting paths. However, such mesh-based cutting ap-
proaches inevitably generate a large number of simulation elements 
after multiple cuts, leading to reduced solving speeds [26]. In addition 
to traditional mesh-based cutting methods, volumetric models with 
both surface and internal structures can be constructed from CT/MRI 
data. By further optimizing the incision shape using second-order Bézier 
curves, it becomes possible to achieve partial cuts that preserve internal 
features [27,28].
Although current technical approaches can meet specific require-
ments for soft tissue modeling or cutting under constrained conditions, 
simulations often focus on individual functionalities in isolation. From 
a visual standpoint, achieving low-volume-loss cutting while maintain-
ing a smooth frame rate and user experience remains challenging. 
Regarding force feedback, traditional methods typically rely on ap-
plying increased reaction forces to prevent penetration. While these 
approaches can be effective within moderate force ranges, excessive 
user input may still lead to undesirable outcomes—such as excessive 
compression of the tissue or visual artifacts like interpenetration.
This paper proposes a CUDA-parallelized Dual Contouring algorithm 
for real-time three-dimensional model reconstruction. The proposed 
method generates low-loss cutting surfaces during progressive soft 
tissue cutting simulations and prevents the physical simulation of soft 
tissues from being adversely affected by elongated triangular facets 
after multiple cuts. The paper employs structural springs and bending 
springs for soft tissue physical modeling [29], utilizes an adaptive 
Runge–Kutta method for updating particle positions [30], and leverages 
GPU acceleration for particle position calculations, ensuring both the 
accuracy and real-time performance of soft tissue modeling. To tackle 
the issue of penetration between soft tissues and surgical instruments 
during interaction, this paper introduces a method combining Signed 
Distance Functions with the Finger-Proxy model to determine the op-
timal position of surgical instruments following collisions with soft 
tissues. This method ensures that, upon collision, the surgical instru-
ment exerts appropriate pressure and friction forces on the soft tissue, 
preventing protrusions or incorrect displacements of particles within 
the collision region due to penetration. Furthermore, the paper designs 
a soft tissue interaction system accommodating multiple operating con-
ditions, achieving smooth progressive cutting and stable force feedback 
effects. The primary contributions of this paper are summarized as 
follows:
• Propose a parallel-accelerated Dual Contouring algorithm to
achieve real-time three-dimensional reconstruction under both 
fine cutting and electrocoagulation cutting processes, while in-
tegrating a nonlinear physical modeling approach to ensure that 
both visual and physical effects are accurately represented simul-
taneously.
• Propose a force feedback algorithm based on signed distance 
fields, effectively preventing the loss of force feedback or in-
correct deformation of soft tissues caused by model penetration 
during collisions between surgical instruments and soft tissues.
• Design cutting and collision simulation experiments to validate 
the proposed method, with results demonstrating that the method 
can generate smooth and realistic incisions while adapting to 
various operating conditions and collision interactions.
Rest of paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the 
cutting, soft tissue modeling, and collision interaction methods. Sec-
tion 3 provides a detailed description of the virtual simulation platform 
and multi-threaded computation framework. Section 4 presents the 
simulation process. Conclusions are drawn after simulation results.
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
2 

==== PAGE 3 ====
L. Li et al.
Fig. 2.1. Process of geometric surface rendering for soft tissues.
Fig. 2.2. Feature point update method.
2. Methods
To preserve edge features during real-time cutting and ensure that 
multiple cuts do not degrade frame rates, this paper adopts the Dual 
Contouring (DC) method for surface reconstruction. As illustrated in 
Fig. 2.1, the input volumetric data is divided into a uniform background 
grid, followed by adaptive octree subdivision. The intersection proper-
ties of each cube with the isosurface are recorded, including the local 
coordinates of intersection points and the normal vectors of the outer 
surface. Feature point positions are then computed, and adjacent voxel 
feature points are connected to form an approximate surface. 
𝐸=
𝑛−1
∑
𝑖=0
((𝒏𝑖⋅(𝒙−𝒑𝑖))2)
(1)
The above represents the quadratic error function for feature points, 
where 𝒏𝑖 and 𝒑𝑖 denote the intersection point and normal of the 𝑖th 
edge of the cube, respectively, and 𝒙 is the feature point position. By 
minimizing the value of 𝐸, an approximation of 𝒙 can be obtained. To 
avoid performance degradation caused by using matrix decomposition 
to solve the Quadratic Error Function (QEF), this paper adopts the 
method proposed in [31]. The approach utilizes a particle movement 
approximation and Hermite data to generate a single feature point 
within the cube at the boundary. Furthermore, spatial constraints and 
gradient information are employed to optimize the vertex positions.
As shown in Fig. 2.2, the initial feature points are obtained by first 
calculating the average of all intersection points within the grid. The 
following relationships can be derived: 
𝒙0 =
𝑛
∑
𝑖=1
𝒑𝑖
𝑛
(2)
The feature point motion direction 𝑭 is obtained based on the 
positions of the intersection points and their normals: 
𝑭=
𝑛
∑
𝑖=1
(−(𝒙0 −𝒑𝑖
) ⋅𝒏2
𝑖
)
(3)
The new feature point position is written as following, 
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝒙1 = 𝒙0 + 𝑎⋅𝑭
𝑎= 0.1 ⋅
(
1 −𝑖
𝑚
)
(4)
where 𝑎 is used to scale the update step, allowing the feature points to 
converge to their final positions more quickly. The maximum number 
of iterations is m. At this point, based on all the edges that intersect 
with the iso-surface, the feature points of the surrounding four cubes 
are connected to form the outer surface. This method shares the same 
limitation as matrix decomposition, where face intersections may oc-
cur, primarily because the feature points extend beyond their respective 
voxels. Let the voxel edge length be 𝐿 and the position be (x,y,z), then 
the signed distance field can be obtained: 
𝑆𝐷𝐹(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = max(max(||𝑥−𝑥𝑐|| −𝐿
2 , ||𝑦−𝑦𝑐|| −𝐿
2 ), ||𝑧−𝑧𝑐|| −𝐿
2 )
(5)
when the SDF value is negative, the iteration is stopped, resulting in a 
smooth, non-intersecting surface.
2.1. Cutting process
2.1.1. The static cutting process
As shown in the Fig. 2.3, the surface reconstruction and cutting 
diagram in 2D, the deformable object is embedded in the background 
grid, and its surface is reconstructed using Dual Contouring. The re-
construction of the outer surface is the preprocessing step before the 
cutting, and its complexity does not affect the real-time performance. 
In this process, the blue grid represents the voxel grid used for re-
construction, where the 12 edges of each voxel are used both for 
3D reconstruction and to represent the physical interactions between 
particles. When reconstructing the outer surface, the voxel edges that 
intersect with the isosurface are marked as ‘‘Intersecting edges’’, and 
the intersection points generated on the voxel edges are marked as ‘‘In-
tersecting Points’’. The global coordinates of these intersection points, 
their local coordinates within the voxel, and the normals at these 
points are also recorded. To quickly identify the intersecting edges, a 
Marching Cubes lookup table is used. Each voxel intersecting with the 
isosurface computes the feature points as shown in Fig. 2.2. Then, for 
each intersecting edge, the feature points from the surrounding four 
voxels are connected to form two triangular surfaces. The figure on 
the right illustrates the specific cutting process, where the yellow line 
represents the cutting path. During the cutting process, the voxel edges 
being cut are marked as ‘‘Cutting edge’’, and the intersection point 
location information is recorded. The surface generation during the 
cutting process differs from that of the outer surface. The cut internal 
voxel grid will dynamically compute its undirected graph connectivity. 
This graph has 8 vertices and 12 edges, and each voxel, when cut, can 
form up to 8 feature points. Therefore, the connectivity component 
of each vertex needs to be obtained. The connectivity of the voxel 
is pre-calculated and stored as a 2D array, with a total of 212(4096) 
possible configurations. Similar to the Marching Cubes lookup table, 
each edge has two states: intersecting with the target contour or not. 
Thus, the state of each edge can be represented by a binary bit, where 
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
3 

==== PAGE 4 ====
L. Li et al.
Fig. 2.3. Static cutting method.
Fig. 2.4. Voxel connectivity graph disconnection.
Fig. 2.5. Local surface rendering.
‘‘0’’ indicates no intersection and ‘‘1’’ indicates intersection. When none 
of the edges intersect, the state is stored as the index ‘‘000000000000’’. 
When the 𝑖th edge is cut, the index can be quickly updated using a 
bitwise or operation to obtain the new connectivity.
Each vertex within a voxel has three edges. For each connected 
component, the edges that are cut and the cut points of all its vertices 
need to be identified. The feature point is the centroid of all the cut 
points. As shown in Fig. 2.4, the voxel is divided into two connected 
components, and each connected component has its corresponding 
feature point. Each edge that contains a vertex will participate in the 
calculation, and the cut edges will be calculated twice.
After all the voxel grids and edges are calculated, each particle’s 6 
edges and 8 neighboring quadrants are traversed. If an edge is cut, the 
corresponding feature points of the four neighboring quadrants of that 
edge are found for the particle. As shown in Fig. 2.5, V1 and V2 share 
two feature points, and they are connected respectively to form two 
triangles.
2.1.2. The dynamic cutting process
As shown in Fig. 2.6, in general, soft tissue undergoes deformation 
due to internal and external forces before cutting, causing its internal 
voxel grid to become distorted and no longer be a uniform hexahedron. 
The coordinate axes of the particles are rotated due to the influence 
of the surrounding connections. The calculation of the new coordinate 
system is based on the method described in [22].
Each coordinate axis’ positive and negative directions are mapped 
to the six surrounding edges of the particle. When an edge is cut, the 
local coordinates of the cut point, relative to the two vertices of the 
edge, are recorded. This is done based on the condition that the edge 
has not undergone any deformation. As shown in the Fig. 2.7, when the 
cut is complete, the physical connection of that edge is severed, and the 
new cut point is computed using the corresponding coordinate axes.
2.1.3. Cutting path
In virtual surgery, real-time performance is a critical factor. Com-
plex mesh structures increase computational burdens, especially dur-
ing cutting operations, where a large amount of mesh data must be 
processed. This can lead to high computational costs and increased 
latency [32,33]. As shown in Fig. 2.8, to accurately detect the inter-
section between the cutting surgical instrument and the mesh during 
cutting, and to generate continuous cutting paths, this paper defines 
the surgical instrument as a cutting line. The cutting plane is formed 
by the cutting path of the previous and current frames, and the cut-
ting plane consists of two triangles. This cutting plane persists in 
the simulation at any given frame. The advantage of this approach 
is that it prevents collision detection failure due to low frame rates 
or rapid movement of the surgical instrument. For collision detection 
between the cutting plane and the mesh, this paper employs the Möller-
Trumbore algorithm for fast ray-triangle intersection tests. The core 
of this method is to determine intersection conditions by calculating 
the geometric relationship between the ray and the triangle, without 
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
4 

==== PAGE 5 ====
L. Li et al.
Fig. 2.6. The direction of the particles changes after deformation.
Fig. 2.7. Surface rendering after changing particle directions.
explicitly calculating the intersection point. This makes it more efficient 
than other algorithms that require solving quadratic equations, which is 
particularly important for large-scale parallel computation on hardware 
to enhance performance [34,35].
Let the ray origin and direction be 𝑶 and 𝑫, and the triangle vertices 
be 𝑽0, 𝑽1, and 𝑽2. The parameterized equation for the intersection 
point is: 
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝑶+ 𝑡𝑫= 𝑽0 + 𝑢𝑳1 + 𝑣𝑳2
𝑳1 = 𝑽1 −𝑽0
𝑳2 = 𝑽2 −𝑽0
(6)
The parameter 𝑡 represents the ray parameter, and 𝑢 and 𝑣 are 
the barycentric coordinates that must satisfy the following conditions: 
𝑢≥0, 𝑣≥0, and 𝑢+ 𝑣≤1. The parameters are solved using Cramer’s 
rule to solve the system of linear equations: 
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
[
𝑫
−𝑳1
−𝑳2
] ⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
𝑡
𝑢
𝑣
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
= 𝑻
𝑻= 𝑽0 −𝑶
(7)
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
𝑡
𝑢
𝑣
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
=
1
||| 𝑫
−𝑳1
−𝑳2
|||
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
||| 𝑻
−𝑳1
−𝑳2 |||
||| 𝑫
𝑻
−𝑳2 |||
||| 𝑫
−𝑳1
𝑻|||
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
=
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
(𝑳2 × 𝑻)𝑳1∕((𝑳2 × 𝑫)𝑳1)
−(𝑳2 × 𝑫)𝑻∕((𝑳2 × 𝑫)𝑳1)
(𝑫× 𝑻)𝑳1∕((𝑳2 × 𝑫)𝑳1)
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
(8)
2.1.4. Ablation cutting process
In surgery, besides traditional blade cutting, electrocautery and ul-
trasound technologies are also widely used [36]. Electrocautery cutting 
Fig. 2.8. Ray-based cutting method.
is a technique where an electric current is directly applied to tissue, 
generating heat through high-frequency current to cut and coagulate 
tissue. Its advantages include reducing intraoperative bleeding, improv-
ing surgical precision, and enhancing safety. This type of cutting is 
often accompanied by some thermal damage and minimal volume loss. 
Similar volume loss simulations also exist in ophthalmic surgery, such 
as in cataract surgery, where ultrasound phacoemulsification is used to 
break the lens into small fragments and then aspirate them [37].
As shown in Fig. 2.9, the ablation cutting simulation process with 
volume loss is depicted. When the surgical instrument’s cutting path 
passes through the soft tissue, the state of particles within a certain 
range is altered. Initially, the particles outside the isosurface are di-
rectly deleted and no longer participate in force calculations or surface 
generation. The particles initially within the isosurface are designated 
as ‘‘ablated particles’’, and the edges connecting these particles are 
marked as ‘‘ablated edges’’. At this point, the particles are deleted, 
cutting points are generated along the ‘‘ablated edges’’, and finally, all 
voxel grids are updated and the surface is redrawn.
2.2. Soft tissue modeling
Soft tissue modeling accurately describes the physical properties of 
the tissue, ensuring that the physical response of the cut tissue part 
is consistent with the uncutted part. The modeling needs to consider 
not only geometric deformations but also the internal mechanical be-
haviors, such as tension, compression, and bending. During the cutting 
process, the model helps calculate the forces exerted by the cutting 
surgical instrument on the soft tissue and how the tissue recovers or 
changes under the applied force.
In this paper, structural springs and bending springs based on hexa-
hedral structured grids are applied to the computation of soft tissue. As 
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
5 

==== PAGE 6 ====
L. Li et al.
Fig. 2.9. Ablation cutting process.
Fig. 2.10. Local elastic structure.
shown in Fig. 2.6, a two-dimensional schematic illustrates the deforma-
tion of the soft tissue grid. To ensure proper coupling between surface 
rendering and internal force calculation during soft tissue cutting, and 
to avoid scenarios where the soft tissue appears visually severed while 
forces are still acting on the separated ends, the physical model grid 
is used for surface rendering.s shown in Fig. 2.10, the Kelvin–Voigt 
model is adopted to simulate the viscoelasticity of soft tissue. Structural 
springs are used to model the stretching and compression of the soft 
tissue, while bending springs simulate resistance to bending and shear. 
The traditional diagonal shear springs in hexahedral grid methods are 
omitted in this approach.
For particle i, its motion equation is: 
𝑴̈𝒙𝑖+ 𝑭int = 𝑭ext
(9)
The internal force 𝑭int consists of two components: the elastic force 
generated by linear stretching or compression 𝑭𝒔, and the bending force 
induced by changes in the angle between adjacent springs 𝑭𝒃: 
𝑭int = 𝑭𝑠
𝑖+ 𝑭𝑏
𝑖
(10)
For any given particle, there can be up to six neighboring par-
ticles, six structural spring connections, and fifteen pairs of bending 
constraints. The force relationship between the central particle and any 
of its surrounding particles is given by: 
𝑭𝑠
𝑖𝑗= −𝑘𝑠⋅‖‖‖𝒙𝑖−𝒙𝑗‖‖‖ ⋅
𝒙𝑖−𝒙𝑗
‖‖‖𝒙𝑖−𝒙𝑗‖‖‖
−𝑐𝑠⋅( ̇𝒙𝑖−̇𝒙𝑗)
(11)
where 𝑘𝑠 and 𝑐𝑠 represent the stiffness coefficient and damping coeffi-
cient of the structural spring, respectively. The total force exerted by 
the structural springs on particle 𝑖 is: 
𝑭𝑠
𝑖=
5
∑
𝑗=0
𝑭𝑠
𝑖𝑗
(12)
For particle 𝑖 and any two surrounding particles 𝑗 and 𝑘 forming the 
𝑛th bending constraint, the bending moment it experiences is: 
𝑀𝑖𝑛= 𝑘𝑏⋅(𝜃𝑗𝑘−𝜃0
𝑗𝑘)
(13)
The force experienced by particles 𝑗 and 𝑘 can be obtained by 
converting the bending moment as follows: 
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝑭M
𝑖𝑗=
(
𝑘𝑏⋅(𝜃𝑗𝑘−𝜃0
𝑗𝑘) + 𝑐𝑏̇𝜃
)
× (𝑵𝑖𝑘× 𝑵𝑖𝑗) × 𝑵𝑖𝑗
𝑭M
𝑖𝑘=
(
𝑘𝑏⋅(𝜃𝑗𝑘−𝜃0
𝑗𝑘) + 𝑐𝑏̇𝜃
)
× (𝑵𝑖𝑗× 𝑵𝑖𝑘) × 𝑵𝑖𝑘
(14)
where 𝑵𝑖𝑗=
𝒙𝑖−𝒙𝑗
‖‖‖𝒙𝑖−𝒙𝑗‖‖‖
 is the unit vector from particle 𝑖 to particle 𝑗. The 
force on particle 𝑗 under the influence of the bending moment can be 
expressed as: 
𝑭𝑏
𝑖𝑛= −(𝑭𝑀
𝑖𝑗+ 𝑭𝑀
𝑖𝑘)
(15)
The total force exerted on particle 𝑖 by the bending springs can be 
expressed as: 
𝑭𝑏
𝑖=
14
∑
𝑛=0
𝑭𝑏
𝑖𝑛
(16)
In soft tissue simulation, time integration methods are used to 
numerically solve the ordinary differential equations that describe the 
dynamic behavior of soft tissues. Choosing an appropriate time integra-
tion method is crucial for the stability and accuracy of the simulation 
results. Compared to implicit integration and small-step explicit inte-
gration, this paper adopts the adaptive step-size Runge–Kutta method, 
which can simultaneously meet the requirements for both solution 
accuracy and efficiency. With CUDA acceleration, this algorithm can be 
used to validate the cutting and force feedback algorithms presented in 
this paper. Given the current time step 𝑡𝑛, the position of the particle is 
𝒙𝒏, and the state vector of the particle is 𝒚𝒏= [𝒙𝒏
̇𝒙𝑛
]𝑇, the following 
can be obtained: 
𝒇(𝑡𝑛, 𝒚𝑛) =
[
̇𝒙𝑛
𝑭ext + 𝑭int
𝑚
]𝑇
(17)
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
6 

==== PAGE 7 ====
L. Li et al.
For the time step ℎ, the 7 slopes at 𝑡𝑛= 𝑡𝑛+ ℎ can be calculated as 
follows in the Runge–Kutta method: 
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎩
𝑘1 = 𝒇(𝑡𝑛, 𝒚𝒏)
𝑘2 = 𝒇
(
𝑡𝑛+ 1
5 ℎ, 𝒚𝒏+ ℎ⋅
(
1
5 𝑘1
))
𝑘3 = 𝒇
(
𝑡𝑛+ 3
10 ℎ, 𝒚𝒏+ ℎ⋅
(
3
40 𝑘1 + 9
40 𝑘2
))
𝑘4 = 𝒇
(
𝑡𝑛+ 4
5 ℎ, 𝒚𝒏+ ℎ⋅
(
44
45 𝑘1 −56
15 𝑘2 + 32
9 𝑘3
))
𝑘5 = 𝒇
(
𝑡𝑛+ 8
9 ℎ, 𝒚𝒏+ ℎ⋅
(
19372
6561 𝑘1 −25360
2187 𝑘2 + 64448
6561 𝑘3 −212
729 𝑘4
))
𝑘6 = 𝒇
(
𝑡𝑛+ ℎ, 𝒚𝒏+ ℎ⋅
(
9017
3168 𝑘1 −355
33 𝑘2 + 46732
5247 𝑘3 + 49
176 𝑘4
−5103
18656 𝑘5
))
𝑘7 = 𝒇
(
𝑡𝑛+ ℎ, 𝒚𝒏+ ℎ⋅
(
35
384 𝑘1 + 500
1113 𝑘3 + 125
192 𝑘4 −2187
6784 𝑘5 + 11
84 𝑘6
))
(18)
The fourth-order solution and the fifth-order solution are respec-
tively: 
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝒚(4)
𝑛+1 = 𝒚𝑛+ 5179
57600 𝑘1 + 7571
16695𝑘3 + 393
640 𝑘4 −92097
339200𝑘5 + 187
2100 𝑘6 + 1
40𝑘7
𝒚(5)
𝑛+1 = 𝒚𝑛+ 35
384 𝑘1 + 500
1113 𝑘3 + 125
192 𝑘4 −2187
6784𝑘5 + 11
84𝑘6
(19)
The error can be obtained as: 
𝛥= ‖‖‖𝒚(5)
𝑛+1 −𝒚(4)
𝑛+1
‖‖‖
(20)
The new time step size ℎn can be obtained based on the error as: 
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝜀= 10−3
ℎn = ℎ⋅0.9 ⋅( 𝛥
𝜀)1∕5
0.2ℎ< ℎn < 5ℎ
(21)
where 𝜀 is the error threshold. The step size adjustment can theoreti-
cally generate any value, but unrestricted step size changes may lead to 
numerical issues or inefficiencies. Therefore, upper and lower bounds 
need to be set.
2.3. Haptic rendering
In order to provide realistic haptic feedback in virtual surgery, 
allowing users to clearly perceive the shape, stiffness, and other prop-
erties of the model’s surface, appropriate force feedback calculation 
methods need to be established for both the surgical instrument and 
the organ model. Traditional force feedback methods mainly focus 
on physical modeling of the soft tissue itself, with the force often 
concentrated at the tip of the surgical instrument. This results in no 
force feedback when other parts of the surgical instrument collide, 
and even causes penetration issues [38,39]. A key problem in virtual 
surgery is how to establish collision constraints between the entire 
surgical instrument and the soft tissue [22,40].
This paper proposes an improvement based on the Finger-Proxy 
algorithm, simplifying the complex collision detection process between 
surgical instruments. As shown in Figs. 2.11 (b), (c), and (d), the 
surgical instrument is first approximated as a slender capsule, with its 
volume represented by a directed distance field. Unlike [22], the force 
feedback in this paper is no longer based on particle-surgical instrument 
collisions, but rather on collisions between the triangular faces of the 
soft tissue model and the soft tissue itself.
As shown in Fig. 2.11 (a), the Physical surgical instrument controls 
the position and orientation of the proxy surgical instrument. The proxy 
surgical instrument is displayed on the rendering interface, while the 
Physical surgical instrument is hidden. By calculating their position 
and orientation deviations in real-time, the proxy surgical instrument 
gradually approaches the Physical surgical instrument in discrete steps. 
Let the position of the Physical surgical instrument be denoted as P𝐴, 
Fig. 2.11. Haptic model.(a)The proxy tool remains on the external surface, 
resulting in a positional and angular deviation from the actual tool. (b)The 
distance between the tool and the surface is iteratively calculated using the 
SDF of triangular faces. (c)The tool does not collide with the mesh. (d)The 
tool collides with the mesh.
the position of the proxy surgical instrument as P𝐵, and the orientation 
quaternions as 𝒒𝐴 and 𝒒𝐵, respectively. The position deviation 𝛥P, the 
rotation axis k, and the rotation angle 𝜃 can then be determined. 
𝛥P = PB −PA
(22)
𝛥q = q𝐵⊗q−1
𝐴= (𝛥q𝑤, 𝛥q𝑥, 𝛥q𝑦, 𝛥q𝑧)
(23)
𝜃= 2 arccos(𝛥q𝑤)
(24)
k =
1
sin(𝜃∕2)
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
𝛥q𝑥
𝛥q𝑦
𝛥q𝑧
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
,
𝜃≠0
(25)
As shown in Fig. 2.11 (b), the distance from the surgical instrument 
to each nearby triangle face is computed in parallel to determine the 
closest distance between the soft tissue and the surgical instrument. 
Both the surgical instrument and the triangular faces in space are con-
vex shapes. When using the alternating projection method to compute 
the nearest point, each projection mapping is a non-expansive mapping. 
As a result, after each projection, the computed shortest distance is 
always less than or equal to that of the previous iteration. 
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪⎩
𝐀𝑛= 𝐒𝐃𝐅(Triangle, 𝐏𝑛)
𝐏𝑛+1 = 𝐒𝐃𝐅(Tool, 𝐀𝑛)
𝐃𝑛= ‖𝐀𝑛−𝐏𝑛‖
𝐃𝑛+1 = ‖𝐏𝑛+1 −𝐀𝑛‖
𝐃𝑛+1 ≤𝐃𝑛
(26)
where 𝐀𝑛 denotes a point on the triangle, 𝐏𝑛 denotes a point on the 
tool, 𝐒𝐃𝐅(Triangle, 𝐏𝑛) represents the mapping of 𝐏𝑛 to its nearest point 
on the triangle, and 𝐒𝐃𝐅(Tool, 𝐀𝑛) represents the mapping of 𝐀𝑛 to its 
nearest point on the tool. 
As shown in Algorithm 1, an iterative optimization approach is used 
to obtain the closest distance and the nearest points of the two models. 
First, an arbitrary point 𝑷𝟎 is selected on the surgical instrument as 
the starting point. Using the directed distance field function of the 
triangular face, the nearest point 𝑨𝟎 and the direction are determined. 
Then, using the directed distance field of the surgical instrument, the 
nearest point on the surgical instrument is found, and the position 
of 𝑷 is updated. When the magnitude of the two directed distances 
is smaller than the error threshold, stop the iteration. If penetration 
occurs, and the closest distance is smaller than the surgical instrument 
radius, the minimum separation direction is determined, and the proxy 
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
7 

==== PAGE 8 ====
L. Li et al.
Algorithm 1 Get the new position of Proxy tool after collision
1: Input: Triangles, Proxy Tool
2: Output: Proxy Tool Position (𝑷𝑡)
3: 𝜀←1 × 10−3
4: 𝑎←0.1
5: Initialize Minimum Separation Vector 𝒗ms to a large value
6: while True do
7:  
for each triangle in Triangles do
8:  
Select the starting point 𝑷0 on the tool
9:  
𝑖←0
10:  
while 𝑖< 100 do
11:  
𝑨0 ←SDF(triangle, 𝑷0)
12:  
𝑷1 ←SDF(tool, 𝑨0)
13:  
𝛥←‖‖𝑷𝑖−𝑨𝑖‖‖ −‖‖𝑷𝑖+1 −𝑨𝑖‖‖
14:  
if |𝛥| < 𝜀 then
15:  
𝑫←𝑷𝑖−𝑨𝑖
16:  
if ‖𝑫‖ < ‖𝒗ms‖ then
17:  
𝒗ms ←𝑫
18:  
break
19:  
end if
20:  
end if
21:  
𝑖←𝑖+ 1
22:  
end while
23:  
end for
24:  
𝑷𝑡←𝑷𝑡+ 𝑎⋅𝒗ms
25:  
if ‖𝒗ms‖ < 𝜀 then
26:  
break
27:  
end if
28: end while
29: Return the 𝑷𝑡
surgical instrument is moved outward, ensuring that the proxy surgical 
instrument always stays on the surface of the soft tissue. At this point, 
the force feedback value is calculated based on the position and pose 
deviation of the two surgical instruments, and the reaction force is 
applied to the particles of the nearby triangle faces, as shown in Fig. 
2.11 (a).
The force feedback calculation for the surgical instrument is as 
follows: 
{
𝐅= 𝐾𝑝⋅𝛥𝐏−𝐷𝑝⋅𝐯
𝝉= 𝐾𝑜⋅𝜃⋅𝐤−𝐷𝑜⋅𝝎
(27)
The force feedback applied to the surgical instrument consists of 
two components: a restoring term proportional to the position error 
and a damping term proportional to the velocity. The damping term 
only takes effect during contact to counteract oscillations. Where 𝐅 is 
the linear force, 𝐾𝑝 is the position stiffness coefficient, 𝐷𝑣 is the linear 
velocity damping coefficient, 𝐯 is the instrument’s linear velocity, 𝝉 is 
the torque, 𝐾𝑜 is the orientation stiffness coefficient, 𝐷𝑜 is the angular 
velocity damping coefficient, and 𝝎 is the angular velocity vector.
3. Results
3.1. Experimental platform
In the virtual surgery platform presented in this paper, the server 
is configured with an NVIDIA RTX A2000 GPU and a 12th Gen 
Intel® CoreTM i7-12700H processor. The software surgical instruments 
used include the Unity3D 2021.3 development engine, CUDA 12.5, 
Visual Studio 2022, and Matlab 2021. For the hardware part, the Omni 
haptic feedback device acts as both the force feedback device and the 
virtual surgical instrument manipulator. All computational processes in 
this paper are based on C++ and CUDA, with the rendering interface 
implemented using Unity3D and C#. The OpenHaptics plugin is used 
to connect Unity3D with the force feedback device, providing the 
ability to integrate 3D haptics into Unity and add haptic effects to the 
virtual world. The force feedback device converts the operator’s control 
commands into mechanical motion data, which is input into the server 
to precisely control the movement of the surgical instrument in the 
virtual surgery environment. The server calculates and analyzes the 
input data, simulates the interaction between the surgical instrument 
and the soft tissue model, and then transmits the resulting geometric 
data and surgical instrument movement information to the display. 
Simultaneously, the server also transmits the force feedback from the 
model to the haptic feedback device, allowing the user to experience 
this feedback through the device’s handle.
3.2. Virtual simulation computing framework
As shown in Fig. 3.1, the overall computational framework of this 
paper consists of two computational stages: the preprocessing stage 
and the real-time simulation stage, each sub-thread’s output to other 
threads is highlighted with yellow boxes. In the preprocessing stage, 
the first step is to generate the background grid, based on which an 
outer surface is created by calculating the intersection points between 
the grid and the isosurface. The state information of the voxel corner 
points is then labeled. Afterward, the feature points within each voxel 
grid are computed using the GPU, and for each edge intersecting with 
the isosurface, feature points of the surrounding four voxels are con-
nected to form two triangular faces, ultimately generating a continuous 
surface. In the real-time update stage, simulation calculations for the 
soft tissue are performed across three CPU threads. In the soft tissue 
modeling thread, the forces, positions, and orientations of particles are 
calculated, and the results are used to update the eight corner points 
of the background voxel grid in the geometry reconstruction thread. 
In the geometry reconstruction thread, the cutting operation is per-
formed. On one hand, this affects the calculation of subsequent feature 
points and surface generation, and on the other hand, it changes the 
connectivity between soft tissue particles while updating their forces 
and orientations. After the surface is reconstructed, the triangular face 
information is used in the force feedback thread for collision detection 
between the surgical instrument and the soft tissue. In this thread, 
the proxy surgical instrument’s position is updated in real-time to pre-
vent penetration, and the position and orientation deviations between 
the proxy surgical instrument and the actual surgical instrument are 
calculated to compute the forces. Once the force feedback results are 
obtained, a reaction force threshold is set and applied to update the 
particle positions, ensuring smooth collision forces without penetration. 
The data communication rules between threads are that the same data 
should not be written to by two threads simultaneously on the CPU. 
If linear operations need to be performed on the data, atomic addition 
operations must be used in the GPU, and excessive atomic operations on 
the same thread are prohibited, otherwise, parallel computation would 
degrade to serial computation.
Our method is presented as a fully parallelized solution, featuring 
a multithreaded design framework that effectively avoids data races. It 
integrates soft tissue geometric modeling, physical modeling, and force 
feedback computation modules. The coupling between multiple threads 
in our approach does not affect the execution and output of individual 
threads. Even when the three threads run independently, users can 
ignore any visual or haptic discomfort caused by thread delays at a 
certain frame rate.
As shown in Fig. 3.2, the soft tissue calculation framework in this 
paper includes three sub-threads for data computation and one Unity 
visual rendering main thread. In the soft tissue simulation, the number 
of particles has the greatest impact on performance. The particles and 
their surrounding links are the most frequently used data in the GPU 
sub-threads. For different particle counts, the relationship between the 
frame rates of inter-thread operations is as follows:
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
8 

==== PAGE 9 ====
L. Li et al.
Fig. 3.1. Computing framework.
Fig. 3.2. The frame rates of different threads.
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
9 

==== PAGE 10 ====
L. Li et al.
Fig. 3.3. Cutting results of the model using different Methods. (a) Tetrahedral Method. (b) Our Method. (c) MC Method.
Fig. 3.4. Volume loss rate during soft tissue cutting.
3.3. Comparison
This paper experimentally verifies the advantages of the proposed 
cutting algorithm by comparing it with the traditional Marching Cubes 
(MC) cutting algorithm and the tetrahedral cutting algorithm. Com-
pared to the MC method, the proposed approach ensures minimal 
volume loss during cutting while retaining the ablation effect of the 
MC algorithm. This allows the simulation to maintain small incision 
gaps when using a blade while also adapting to surgical procedures 
involving ablation effects, such as electrocautery or ultrasonic emul-
sification. Compared to traditional tetrahedral cutting, the proposed 
method avoids dynamically adding new particles or voxels and elim-
inates concerns about the impact of distorted triangular faces or tetra-
hedra on mechanical simulation. As a result, it prevents the increase in 
computation time caused by the growing number of cutting surfaces.
As shown in Figs. 3.3 and 3.4, under zero-gravity conditions, the 
volume loss rate of soft tissue gradually increases as cutting progresses; 
if this trend continues, the tissue volume will eventually approach zero 
after multiple cuts. This paper compares the volume loss rates during 
cutting among the MC cutting method, the tetrahedral cutting method, 
and the proposed method. Since the tetrahedral method cuts along 
the mesh edges, volume loss mainly arises from slight smoothing of 
vertices, resulting in relatively less volume loss. However, both the 
MC method and the proposed DC method use an approximate solution 
based on vertex averaging when processing internal vertices, causing 
more noticeable volume loss at the edges. Compared to the MC method, 
the proposed method maintains a relatively lower loss rate on internal 
cut surfaces, demonstrating the ability to handle progressive cutting 
and preserving a certain degree of realism during small-scale cuts.
As shown in Fig. 3.5, a comparison of frame rates during the 
cutting process between the proposed method and other methods is 
presented. During continuous cutting, we estimate the approximate 
frames processed per second by measuring the execution time of each 
Fig. 3.5. Average frame rate drop during soft tissue cutting.
frame. Every 50 frames, we calculate the average frame rate over the 
preceding 50 frames and compare it to the frame rate before cutting to 
determine the average frame rate loss.
The figure clearly demonstrates that, compared to the tetrahedral 
cutting method, the proposed method maintains a relatively stable 
frame rate during cutting, with a slower rate of decline. In the tetra-
hedral cutting method, tetrahedral voxels are subdivided to generate 
smaller voxels, helping to ensure volume stability during blade cutting. 
However, as more voxels are generated during the cutting process, 
mechanical relationships must be re-established, and the impact of 
elongated triangles on mechanical simulations needs to be considered. 
This increases computational complexity, affecting the efficiency of soft 
tissue cutting. In contrast, the proposed method does not introduce 
new particles but only increases the number of voxels that need to be 
rendered, optimizing the speed of frame rate decline and bringing its 
performance loss rate closer to that of the MC algorithm.
When handling mesh splitting, compared with the classical ap-
proach of soft tissue modeling using complete hexahedral meshes com-
bined with the dual-contouring method, our approach directly com-
putes the positions of feature points using the coordinate frames of 
six-degree-of-freedom particles, thereby avoiding the need to update 
the full mesh vertex list. Since each particle’s update is influenced 
by surrounding particles, updating the coordinate frame of each par-
ticle introduces additional computation; however, this operation can 
be efficiently parallelized, with each thread performing at most six 
atomic additions per particle. Timing comparisons of the mesh update 
process indicate that our method achieves a clear advantage in mesh 
reconstruction speed, as shown in Table 1. 
As shown in Fig. 3.6, in traditional soft tissue simulations, the in-
teraction between the surgical tool and soft tissue is typically modeled 
using the Finger-Proxy algorithm within the Chai3D framework for 
force feedback, or by directly applying force to individual particles or 
groups of particles. However, this method does not ensure that parts of 
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
10 

==== PAGE 11 ====
L. Li et al.
Table 1
Mesh reconstruction time for different particle counts.
Method
Time (ms)
Particle Count 
9580
11103
12626
18617
24609
29842
35075
44688
54301
Hexahedral+DC
5.13
5.70
6.27
9.17
12.07
13.91
15.75
19.84
23.92
Ours
0.87
1.00
1.12
1.52
1.91
2.21
2.51
4.08
5.66
Fig. 3.6. Comparison of two force feedback models. Left: the classic point-to-
surface(Finger-Proxy) collision model. Right: the improved volume-to-surface 
collision model.
Fig. 3.7. Force growth during the collision process.
the surgical tool other than the tip have a collision volume, which can 
result in model penetration, as illustrated in the left image. When an ap-
proximate tool presses against particles, if the applied pressure exceeds 
a certain threshold, the model may experience excessive deformation, 
or the tool may penetrate the tissue. To address this issue, the proposed 
method uses a signed distance field to approximate the representation 
of the surgical tool. By combining this with the force rendering concept 
of the Finger-Proxy model, it ensures that the surgical tool remains 
outside the soft tissue, thereby preventing the penetration problem, as 
shown in the right image. As shown in Fig. 3.7, the force feedback 
curve after smoothing during the collision process is presented. When 
the tool presses down from top to bottom, the force along the z-axis 
gradually increases at the initial moment. After approximately 2 s, the 
tool collides at other positions, and at this point, the forces along the x 
and y axes also begin to gradually increase.
3.4. Interaction simulation
To further validate the practical effectiveness of our algorithm in 
applications, simulation experiments on soft tissue interactions un-
der different conditions were conducted. These experiments mainly 
included soft tissue cutting, tearing, and collision effects.
In our model, the voxel partitioning is based on the AABB bounding 
box, a total of 54,301 particles were used for soft tissue surface ren-
dering and dynamic modeling, the voxel size was set to 0.25 cm. The 
stiffness coefficient 𝑘𝑠 was set to 7.5 × 104 N/m, the bending coefficient 
𝑘𝑏 to 2×104 N/m, with damping coefficients 𝑐𝑠= 0.92 and 𝑐𝑏= 0.9. The 
time step was set to 0.02 s.
The results show that the proposed method performs excellently in 
soft tissue cutting and collision interactions. As shown in Fig. 3.8, the 
cutting results under zero gravity conditions. The algorithm proposed 
in this paper supports cutting with varying widths. By changing the 
thickness 𝐷 of the surgical instrument, two cutting points are generated 
on the cutting edge and bound to the particles at both ends. The figure 
illustrates the process of gradually increasing the cutting width from 
zero. It can be seen from the figure that as the blade width increases, 
the cutting gap gradually widens. Fig. 3.9 shows the cutting results 
when a point of the soft tissue is fixed and it naturally falls under the 
influence of gravity. During the cutting operation, the soft tissue below 
the cut gradually opens due to gravity. From the dashed line in the 
figure, it can be seen that the tissue in the upper half moves upward by 
a certain distance before and after the cut, successfully disconnecting 
the physical connection between the upper and lower halves, thereby 
reducing the overall gravity of the soft tissue. After the particle position 
changes, the cutting point can adjust its world coordinates according 
to the position and orientation of the corresponding particle. In the 
fourth part of the figure, it can be observed that even when the particles 
undergo significant displacement and the soft tissue posture changes 
noticeably, the mesh still displays correctly.
Fig. 3.10 shows the cut surfaces of soft tissue after multiple cuts, 
including cross cuts, multiple planar cuts, and curved cuts. After cutting 
and deformation under applied forces, the method is able to maintain 
the integrity of the cut surfaces and the continuity of the textures, 
ensuring visual realism. It supports various cutting conditions and can 
adapt to surgical scenarios requiring multiple cuts. Fig. 3.11 illustrates 
the results of the collision between soft tissue and surgical instruments. 
By computing the minimum distance between the surgical instrument 
and the soft tissue using the proposed method, the position of the 
surgical instrument can be updated in real time. An elastic connection is 
established between the proxy surgical instrument and the physical sur-
gical instrument to ensure that the instrument remains on the surface 
of the soft tissue while exerting forces on both the tissue and the user. 
As shown in the figure, even under large deformations, the surgical 
tool and the soft tissue can maintain the correct relative geometric 
relationship.
Fig. 3.12 illustrates the process of dragging the soft tissue after 
cutting, with cutting continuing during the dragging operation. As 
shown in the figure, the cutting surface fitted by the proposed method 
accurately follows the direction of the applied force, making it suitable 
for simulating scenarios in surgical environments where incisions are 
further cut after being stretched.
Fig. 3.13 present the cutting results of different soft tissues and the 
results of ablation cutting. This method can be applied to liver cutting, 
vascular or intestinal cutting, as well as surgical simulations such 
as phacoemulsification and lens fragmentation in cataract treatment. 
The proposed approach demonstrates good adaptability to surfaces of 
varying complexity.
4. Discussion
In soft tissue modeling and simulation, surface mesh processing 
methods typically include MC, DC, and the tetrahedral method [21–
23,26]. These methods are designed to utilize mesh nodes for surface 
rendering and dynamic simulation. The MC and DC methods gener-
ally employ structured meshes for mechanical simulation, whereas the 
tetrahedral method directly uses the vertices of triangular meshes as 
nodes for dynamic simulation. To address the volume loss and frame 
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
11 

==== PAGE 12 ====
L. Li et al.
Fig. 3.8. The result of changing the cutting width under zero gravity.
Fig. 3.9. The cutting result under the influence of gravity with a fixed point.
Fig. 3.10. Soft tissue after multiple cuts.
rate degradation caused by an increasing number of cutting planes in 
soft tissue cutting simulation, this paper proposes a novel parallelized 
DC strategy that adapts to dynamic and fractured mesh rendering. 
We preprocess all possible cutting cases of hexahedral voxel grids and 
encapsulate them into a lookup table. The corresponding lookup indices 
are stored in binary form, allowing for quick retrieval of mesh connec-
tivity when computing feature points. This enables the determination 
of the number of feature points within each voxel and the contribution 
value of each edge to these feature points, as illustrated in Fig. 3.2. 
Our method maintains real-time performance even when simulating ap-
proximately 50,000 particles. Instead of duplicating or subdividing the 
mesh, our approach processes the cut mesh directly, preventing addi-
tional computational overhead in dynamic simulation. As shown in Fig. 
3.4, during continuous cutting, the decrease in frame rate is relatively 
slow. In contrast, when using the tetrahedral subdivision algorithm 
for cutting, the frame rate declines more rapidly. Our cutting method 
balances low-volume loss cutting and real-time performance. However, 
our approach does not yet consider how to handle fractured meshes 
after adaptive mesh cutting. When using mechanical simulation meshes 
for 3D reconstruction, even if mechanical modeling and geometric mod-
eling run on separate threads, the computational load of the mechanical 
simulation thread must be considered. Therefore, the number of par-
ticles is limited. On GPU computing, our method extensively utilizes 
atomic operations. Specifically, when multiple springs exert forces on 
the same particle, force accumulation requires atomic operations. The 
next computational step must wait until all GPU threads complete this 
force accumulation. Additionally, mesh smoothing also relies on atomic 
operations. Since multiple triangular faces share the same vertex, and 
each triangle contributes to the normal vector calculation in different 
GPU threads, the final normal computation must wait for all threads 
to finish. Otherwise, rendering artifacts such as flickering or blackened 
surfaces may occur. Future work will focus on designing algorithms that 
fully exploit GPU hardware resources. Beyond model processing, we 
also consider force haptic rendering in human–computer interaction. 
When handling collisions between tools and soft tissue, we refer to the 
methods proposed by Zhang, Berndt, et al. [22,40], which approximate 
the shape of surgical instruments using bounding boxes. Combining 
the Finger-Proxy algorithm [38] and signed distance fields, we ensure 
that surgical tools remain on the outer surface of the soft tissue. This 
prevents penetration even when excessive speed or force is applied 
during operation.
5. Conclusion
This paper proposes a virtual simulation algorithm applicable to 
both blade cutting and blunt surgical instrument cutting, providing 
a novel solution for force feedback between soft tissue and surgical 
instruments. To meet real-time requirements, the algorithm’s com-
ponents are parallelized using the CUDA framework for accelerated 
computation, and the complexity of the geometric modeling algorithm 
is optimized. Cutting simulation experiments under various working 
conditions were conducted to validate the effectiveness of both blade 
cutting and blunt surgical instrument ablation cutting.
This study still has certain limitations. For example, the integration 
of physical modeling and geometric modeling within adaptive mesh-
ing has not yet been achieved, there is still significant volume loss, 
and unlimited cutting is not yet supported, which poses challenges 
for simulating thin-walled heterogeneous soft tissues. Compared with 
traditional mesh cutting methods, due to feature point drift, our ap-
proach may cause a sudden separation of the two sides of the cutting 
surface over a large distance, rather than a smooth split, under large 
deformations. To address this issue, we interpolate the positions of post-
cut feature points from the previous frame to the current frame, thereby 
achieving visually smooth transitions. However, this strategy does not 
fully adhere to physical principles and requires further refinement. 
In future work, we will continue to explore techniques in virtual 
surgery simulation, with particular focus on biomechanical modeling 
algorithms, aiming to improve the mechanical performance and in-
teractive experience of virtual soft tissues. The video related to the 
work presented in this paper can be found at the following link: https:
//youtu.be/eK_QKEXwyag.
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
12 

==== PAGE 13 ====
L. Li et al.
Fig. 3.11. Collision and grasping of soft tissues in different regions.
Fig. 3.12. Soft tissue being pulled while being cut.
Table 2
Explanation of key terms in Fig. 2.2.
 Term
Description
 
 Voxel grid
A volumetric grid used for 3D reconstruction.
 
 Intersecting edge
An edge that intersects with the isosurface.
 
 Level Set
A point in the volumetric data where the level set function equals zero,
 
 
typically representing an implicitly defined surface.
 
 Intersecting Point
The point where an edge intersects with the isosurface or the cutting plane. 
 Internal Corner Point
A point located inside the isosurface.
 
 External Corner Point
A point located outside the isosurface.
 
 Initial Average Point
The initial feature point obtained by averaging intersecting points.
 
 Feature Point
A refined point after iterative update from the initial average point.
 
 Normal
The surface normal at the intersecting point.
 
 Direction
The update direction of the feature point.
 
Table 3
Explanation of key terms in Fig. 2.3.
 Term
Description
 
 Cutting edge
An edge that intersects with the cutting plane.
 
 Cutting line
The trajectory of the cutting path.
 
 Intersecting point
The point where an edge intersects with the isosurface or the cutting plane. 
 External feature point
A feature point located on the outer surface.
 
 Internal feature point
A feature point located on the inner surface.
 
Fig. 3.13. Cutting results of different soft tissues.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Liang Li: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Data 
curation, Conceptualization. Lai Zhou: Writing – review & editing, 
Methodology, Funding acquisition. Xueyu Zhou: Software, Investiga-
tion.
Ethics statement
The author certify that this manuscript is original and has not been 
published and will not be submitted elsewhere for publication while 
being considered by Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine. 
And the study is not split up into several parts to increase the quantity 
of submissions and submitted to various journals or to one journal 
over time. No data have been fabricated or manipulated (including 
images) to support your conclusions. No data, text, or theories by 
others are presented as if they were our own. The submission has 
been received explicitly from all co-authors. And authors whose names 
appear on the submission have contributed sufficiently to the scientific 
work and therefore share collective responsibility and accountability 
for the results.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they do not have any commercial or 
associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection 
with the work submitted.
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
13 

==== PAGE 14 ====
L. Li et al.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the 2022 Shanghai Rising Star Program 
(including Sailing Program) [grant numbers No. 22YF1417400].
Appendix. Nomenclature tables
See Tables 2 and 3
References
[1] A.R. See, J.A.G. Choco, K. Chandramohan, Touch, texture and haptic feedback: 
a review on how we feel the world around us, Appl. Sci. 12 (9) (2022) 4686, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app12094686.
[2] K. McCloskey, R. Turlip, H.S. Ahmad, Y.G. Ghenbot, D. Chauhan, J.W. Yoon, 
Virtual and augmented reality in spine surgery: a systematic review, World 
Neurosurg. 173 (2023) 96–107, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2023.02.068.
[3] D. Zuo, M. Zhu, D. Chen, Q. Xue, S. Avril, K. Hackl, Y. He, Three-dimensional 
anisotropic unified continuum model for simulating the healing of damaged 
soft biological tissues, Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 23 (6) (2024) 2193–2212, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10237-024-01888-6.
[4] P. Madhikar, J. Åström, M. Karttunen, Cellsim3d: Gpu accelerated software for 
simulations of cellular growth and division in three dimensions, Comput. Phys. 
Comm. 232 (2018) 206–213, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2018.05.024.
[5] A. Ballit, T.-T. Dao, Hypermsm: A new msm variant for efficient simulation 
of dynamic soft-tissue deformations, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 216 
(2022) 106659, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.106659.
[6] H. Xie, J. Song, B. Gao, Y. Zhong, C. Gu, K.-S. Choi, Finite-element Kalman filter 
with state constraint for dynamic soft tissue modelling, Comput. Biol. Med. 135 
(2021) 104594, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104594.
[7] M. Macklin, M. Müller, N. Chentanez, Xpbd: position-based simulation of com-
pliant constrained dynamics, in: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference 
on Motion in Games, 2016, pp. 49–54, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2994258.
2994272.
[8] S.F. Johnsen, Z.A. Taylor, M.J. Clarkson, J. Hipwell, M. Modat, B. Eiben, L. 
Han, Y. Hu, T. Mertzanidou, D.J. Hawkes, et al., Niftysim: A gpu-based nonlinear 
finite element package for simulation of soft tissue biomechanics, Int. J. Comput. 
Assist. Radiol. Surg. 10 (2015) 1077–1095, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11548-
014-1118-5.
[9] S. Hang, Tetgen, a delaunay-based quality tetrahedral mesh generator, ACM 
Trans. Math. Software 41 (2) (2015) 11, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2629697.
[10] M. Cardoso, B. Feijóo, A.P. Castro, F. Ribeiro, P.R. Fernandes, Axisymmetric finite 
element modelling of the human lens complex under cataract surgery, Symmetry 
13 (4) (2021) 696, http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/sym13040696.
[11] D. Marinković, M. Zehn, Corotational finite element formulation for virtual-
reality based surgery simulators, Phys. Mesomech. 21 (2018) 15–23, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1134/S1029959918010034.
[12] H.P. Bui, S. Tomar, S.P. Bordas, Corotational cut finite element method for real-
time surgical simulation: Application to needle insertion simulation, Comput. 
Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 345 (2019) 183–211, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
cma.2018.10.023.
[13] H. Xie, J. Song, Y. Zhong, C. Gu, K.-S. Choi, Constrained finite element method 
for runtime modeling of soft tissue deformation, Appl. Math. Model. 109 (2022) 
599–612, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2022.05.020.
[14] W. Xu, Y. Wang, W. Huang, Y. Duan, An efficient nonlinear mass–spring model 
for anatomical virtual reality, IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 71 (2022) 1–10, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIM.2022.3164132.
[15] Y. Duan, W. Huang, H. Chang, W. Chen, J. Zhou, S.K. Teo, Y. Su, C.K. Chui, 
S. Chang, Volume preserved mass–spring model with novel constraints for soft 
tissue deformation, IEEE J. Biomed. Heal. Inform. 20 (1) (2014) 268–280, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2014.2370059.
[16] H. Va, M.-H. Choi, M. Hong, Real-time surface-based volume constraints on 
mass–spring model in unity3d, IEEE Access 11 (2023) 17857–17869, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3245130.
[17] J. Zhang, Y. Zhong, C. Gu, Soft tissue deformation modelling through neural 
dynamics-based reaction–diffusion mechanics, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 56 (2018) 
2163–2176, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11517-018-1849-5.
[18] X. Zhang, Z. Wang, W. Sun, S. Jha, et al., Heterogeneous soft tissue deformation 
model based on cellular neural networks: Application in pulmonary hamartomas 
surgery, Biomed. Signal Process. Control. 95 (2024) 106290, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.bspc.2024.106290.
[19] J. Li, T. Liu, L. Kavan, B. Chen, Interactive cutting and tearing in projective 
dynamics with progressive cholesky updates, ACM Trans. Graph. 40 (6) (2021) 
1–12, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3478513.3480505.
[20] W. Hongyu, Y. Haonan, Y. Fan, S. Jian, G. Yuan, T. Ke, H. Aimin, Interactive 
hepatic parenchymal transection simulation with haptic feedback, Virtual Real. 
Intell. Hardw. 3 (5) (2021) 383–396, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.vrih.2021.09.
003.
[21] G. Jeřábková, S. Barbier, F. Faure, J. Allard, Volumetric modeling and interactive 
cutting of deformable bodies, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 103 (2–3) (2010) 
217–224, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2010.09.012.
[22] I. Berndt, R. Torchelsen, A. Maciel, Efficient surgical cutting with position-based 
dynamics, IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 37 (3) (2017) 24–31, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MCG.2017.45.
[23] P. Yu, Z. Zhao, R. Wang, J. Pan, Real-time soft body dissection simulation with 
parallelized graph-based shape matching on gpu, Comput. Methods Programs 
Biomed. 250 (2024) 108171, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2024.108171.
[24] J. Wu, C. Dick, R. Westermann, Interactive high-resolution boundary surfaces for 
deformable bodies with changing topology, Vriphys 11 (2011) 29–38.
[25] J. Wu, R. Westermann, C. Dick, Real-time haptic cutting of high-resolution soft 
tissues, 2014, pp. 469–475.
[26] S. Chen, R. Yang, L. Ma, M. Xu, Y. Zhou, Hybrid optimization-based cutting 
simulation for soft objects, Comput.-Aided Des. 163 (2023) 103561, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.cad.2023.103561.
[27] W. Shi, P.X. Liu, M. Zheng, Cutting procedures with improved visual effects and 
haptic interaction for surgical simulation systems, Comput. Methods Programs 
Biomed. 184 (2020) 105270.
[28] W. Shi, P.X. Liu, M. Zheng, A new volumetric geometric model for cutting 
procedures in surgical simulation, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 178 
(2019) 77–84.
[29] Y. Tang, S. Liu, Y. Deng, Y. Zhang, L. Yin, W. Zheng, An improved method 
for soft tissue modeling, Biomed. Signal Process. Control. 65 (2021) 102367, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2020.102367.
[30] X. Zhang, W. Zhang, W. Sun, A. Song, A new soft tissue deformation model based 
on Runge-Kutta: application in lung, Comput. Biol. Med. 148 (2022) 105811, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105811.
[31] L.A. Schmitz, Analysis and acceleration of high quality isosurface contouring, 
2009, http://hdl.handle.net/10183/151064.
[32] C.R. Koger, S.S. Hassan, J. Yuan, Y. Ding, Virtual reality for interactive medical 
analysis, Front. Virtual Real. 3 (2022) 782854, http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/frvir.
2022.782854.
[33] J. Zhang, J. Qian, H. Zhang, L. He, B. Li, J. Qin, H. Dai, W. Tang, W. Tian, 
Maxillofacial surgical simulation system with haptic feedback, J. Ind. Manag. 
Optim. 17 (6) (2021) http://dx.doi.org/10.3934/jimo.2020137.
[34] T. Mller, B. Trumbore, Fast, Minimum Storage Ray-Triangle Intersection, ACM, 
2005, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1198555.1198746.
[35] V. Shumskiy, Gpu ray tracing–comparative study on ray-triangle intersection 
algorithms, 2013, pp. 78–91, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-39759-2_6.
[36] S. Samal, R. Ramchandani, D. Mohanty, Comparison of intraoperative and 
postoperative outcomes with skin flaps raised using either harmonic scalpels 
or electrocautery during modified radical mastectomy, Cureus 16 (6) (2024) 
http://dx.doi.org/10.7759/cureus.62320.
[37] S.C. Ugurbas, S. Caliskan, A. Alpay, S.H. Ugurbas, Impact of intelligent 
phacoemulsification software on torsional phacoemulsification surgery, Clin. 
Ophthalmol. (2012) 1493–1498, http://dx.doi.org/10.2147/OPTH.S35283.
[38] Y. Liu, B. Liu, A review of virtual surgical object modeling technology based 
on force feedback, Int. J. Adv. Netw. Monit. Control. 7 (2) (2022) 24–31, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2478/ijanmc-2022-0013.
[39] Y. Liu, B. Liu, A review of virtual surgical object modeling technology based 
on force feedback, in: Monitoring and Control (ANMC) Cooperate, vol. 24, Xi’an 
Technological University (CHINA) West Virginia University (USA) Huddersfield 
University of UK (UK), 2022, http://dx.doi.org/10.2478/ijanmc-2022-0013.
[40] X. Zhang, J. Duan, W. Sun, T. Xu, S.K. Jha, A three-stage cutting simulation 
system based on mass–spring model, Comput. Model. Eng. Sci. 127 (1) (2021) 
117–133, http://dx.doi.org/10.32604/cmes.2021.012034.
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 273 (2026) 109123 
14 
