===== [22] PAGE 1 =====
24 
May/June 2017 
Published by the IEEE Computer Society 
0272-1716/17/$33.00 © 2017 IEEE
Applications
Editor: Mike Potel
Efﬁ cient Surgical Cutting with 
Position-Based Dynamics
Iago Berndt
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
Rafael Torchelsen
Federal University of Pelotas
Anderson Maciel
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
S
imulations of cuts on deformable bodies 
have been an active research subject for 
more than two decades. Two surveys pub-
lished 10 years apart1,2 argued that most of the 
problems with the three major tasks involved in 
virtual cutting—collision handling, topology up-
date, and deformation that complies with frequent 
topology update—have been tackled. The effective 
solutions developed to date, however, are only ap-
plicable in simpliﬁ ed scenarios.
Although the increased complexity of graphi-
cal and biomechanical models have improved the 
visual quality of virtual surgery, most previous 
works in cutting limit their scope to actions on 
one organ or even a particular region in one organ. 
Thus, the current cutting methods cannot scale 
to the same level of complexity earned by their 
rendering counterparts. Often, one task (such as 
collision, rendering, haptics, deformation, or cut-
ting) must be severely simpliﬁ ed to free up ﬂ ops 
(ﬂ oating-point operations per second) for another. 
Moreover, in the current state of the art, cutting 
and deforming require updating most of the pre-
computed data that is used to speed up the other 
tasks. This scenario indicates that we cannot sim-
ply rely on the increasing computational power to 
enable the next generation of surgery simulators. 
Roughly 10 years ago, position-based dynamics 
(PBD) appeared as a novel paradigm for simulating 
dynamic systems.3 Unlike the previously widespread 
computer graphics approaches based on forces and 
some successful impulse/velocity-based approaches, 
PBD directly manipulates positions. This presents 
many advantages, such as avoiding overshooting 
problems in explicit integration schemes and mak-
ing it easier to handle collision constraints.
Since then, PBD has been used to simulate cloth, 
deformable solids, rigid bodies, and ﬂ uids.4,5 Re-
cently, researchers proposed a uniﬁ ed approach 
that models gases, liquids, solids, and clothing to-
gether.6 This is done by deﬁ ning speciﬁ c positional 
constraints among groups of particles that are, for 
all other purposes (such as collision and render-
ing), equally represented in the data structure. A 
parallel PBD solver available in the Nvidia FleX de-
veloper library has proven efﬁ cient enough for some 
real-time applications. Although the library’s main 
purpose is to support game development, previous 
works have successfully shown that game-oriented 
libraries are also suitable for medical simulators.7
PBD’s ability to unify solid, liquid, gas, and 
membrane (cloth) is crucial in the context of sim-
ulated surgery. Moreover, it is massively parallel, 
so it can simulate several organs instead of only 
one, as is common with previous works. It also 
provides realistic rendering.
In this article, we address common problems 
with traditional surgery simulation scenarios 
and propose PBD-based solutions. Speciﬁ cally, 
we introduce a skinning scheme that supports 
interactive tissue cutting with haptic feedback. 
In addition, we introduce a method to conﬁ gure 
cluster constraints with PBD and an approach 
to simulate electrosurgery. We demonstrate that 

===== [22] PAGE 2 =====
	
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications
25
combining these new approaches makes simulated 
surgery much more plausible.
Current Methods
Many satisfying solutions have been proposed to 
solve the problem of cutting static/rigid polygo-
nal meshes in computational geometry. However, 
cutting simulation for deformable bodies involves 
a higher order of complexity. When dealing with 
soft bodies, any topological modification caused by 
cutting  will severely limit any assumption used 
by deformation and collision algorithms to reduce 
computational cost. This happens because cutting 
proceeds arbitrarily during real-time interaction, 
resulting in many possible topological changes.8
Computations of soft tissue mechanical re-
sponses for surgery simulation and image-guided 
surgery have been dominated by the finite element 
method (FEM), which uses a mesh of intercon-
nected elements as a computational grid. However, 
mesh-based discretization when modeling surgical 
cutting presents challenges, including high com-
putational cost and the need for remeshing in the 
vicinity of cutting-induced discontinuity. Many 
researchers have developed schemes for interactive 
mesh cutting that attempt to reduce the number 
of new primitives created, create new primitives 
with good aspect ratios, avoid a disconnected 
mesh structure between primitives in the cut path, 
and represent the path traversed by the tool as ac-
curately as possible. For example, Junjun Pan and 
his colleagues described an interactive dissection 
approach for hybrid soft tissue models governed 
by extended PBD.9 
In our research, however, we do not assume 
that a mesh is available. Mesh-free methods are 
based on a set of moving simulation nodes that 
interact with each other according to the govern-
ing equations of elasticity. To use them effectively 
in cutting applications, it is necessary to define a 
discontinuity model and apply a boundary sur-
face definition scheme.2 Xia Jin and colleagues 
introduced the meshless total Lagrangian adaptive 
dynamic relaxation (MTLADR) algorithm, which 
relies on spatial discretization in a form of a node 
cloud.10 The cutting-induced discontinuity is mod-
eled solely through changes in nodal domains of 
influence. Their work does not address perfor-
mance, however. To our knowledge, no interactive 
cutting based on purely mesh-free methods are 
available in the literature.
A major element in surgical cutting is defining 
the cut path. General methods often place seed 
points or a template, such as a plane or other primi-
tive, to incorporate cuts into the model. In surgery 
simulations, the usual approach is to move a virtual 
tool through the object’s surface. In their compre-
hensive survey, Jun Wu and his colleagues assessed 
the performance of virtual cutting simulators.2 
The most efficient algorithm spends nearly 80 ms 
per cutting step for coarse resolution versus 2,104 
ms for refined resolution. The authors made clear, 
however, that because of the reduced degrees of 
freedom (DOF), the simulated deformations can-
not exactly match the high-resolution reference.
Finally, many of the previous works in cutting 
for surgery simulation mention haptics, but no 
haptic algorithm has been presented to deal with 
the sense of touch during cutting.
Dynamic Anatomy Model
Our approach uses PBD to model the objects in-
volved in a surgery and their dynamics. We also 
present the computational flow and the necessary 
steps to enable the simulation. We focus on de-
tailing an integrated strategy, based on PBD, to 
simulate soft tissue, bone, and body fluids, includ-
ing force feedback, tissue cutting, and rendering. 
Our representation is based on points (particles) 
illustrated as spheres (see Figure 1). The interac-
tion between particles is configured as constraints 
within the PBD model. The simulation parameters 
are application-dependent. These parameters can 
be obtained from different sources, such as a to-
mographic dataset, or can be user-defined.
Our goal is not to present an accurate param-
eter-extraction algorithm to model the anatomy 
using PBD. Instead, we intend to show that, given 
Figure 1. Position-based dynamics (PBD) simulation: (a) object represented by particles, (b) color coding 
showing the different materials, (c) final rendering, and (d) heat propagation that cuts the body. (e) The 
orientation of each particle is used to extract the triangular mesh used in the final rendering.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

===== [22] PAGE 3 =====
26	
May/June 2017
Applications
a representation of the human body using parti-
cles, it is possible to obtain a convincing surgery 
simulation. Moreover, we intend to show that the 
application of a specific set of steps using PBD lets 
us represent a larger than ever region of the hu-
man body with high efficiency and visual quality.
Efficient PBD implementations are currently 
available in engines dedicated to producing visual 
effects in movies and games, such as the FleX Li-
brary. Such implementations help developers build 
hybrid scenarios, with rigid, soft, cloth, and fluid 
objects using a unified set of equations. Soft bod-
ies, for example, are obtained by defining spring-
like constrains based on the Hooke’s law between 
particles. Other positional constraints let us form 
clusters along adjacent particles to keep a nonrigid 
set of mass points together. Users define the par-
ticle sizes. Large particles result in a loss of fine 
details on the object, but they allow us to represent 
larger bodies. 
In surgery, dissection (cutting) is crucial. To 
simulate cuts on a PBD soft body, we need to 
modify the constraints that maintain the parti-
cles’ topological organization. Moreover, we must 
account for the different materials (blood, bones, 
and surgical instruments) as each plays a role. Fi-
nally, realistic rendering and force feedback must 
be computed, all in a few milliseconds. 
Material Mapping
A volumetric model is more suitable with PBD 
than triangle meshes. To build organs and fluids, 
we use the photographic images from the Visible 
Human Project to extract the particles’ propri-
eties. The stack of slices forms a 3D volume that 
contains the body anatomy. For each voxel, we 
create a particle that receives the 3D texture co-
ordinate for that location. Some segmentation ap-
proach must be applied to tag each particle with a 
specific tissue (such as blood vessel, bone, muscle, 
and fat). We used manual segmentation for our 
case studies, but the segmented dataset from the 
Visible Human Project could be used or another 
method could be applied.
Each material is configured with a set of propri-
eties: how fast it can be cut, its mass, whether it’s 
soft or rigid, and whether it’s solid or liquid. This 
is a simplification of the actual physical proper-
ties used to enable real-time manipulation. PBD is 
a simplification of physics, but larger numbers of 
parameters and particles lead to increased realism. 
Figure 2 illustrates particles colored according to 
the different materials.
Skinning
Although deformation can be simulated with a 
reduced set of particles, a huge number of par-
ticles would be necessary to mime the atoms of 
real objects and provide a smooth and continu-
ous macroscopic surface for visualization. Because 
it is impossible to compute the dynamics of such 
a large number of particles with today’s comput-
ers, we must use a reduced number of particles 
combined with some adapted rendering algorithm. 
For example, to render the tissue in Figure 1c, the 
particles used are the same used to compute the 
dynamics (Figure 1a), which is comparatively in-
finitesimal given the number of actual pixels.
To enable a smooth and continuous surface for 
rendering based on fewer particles, we use a tri-
angular mesh enclosing the group of particles that 
describe a body (see Figure 3) in an approach simi-
lar to marching cubes (MC). However, because the 
volume deforms and can be cut, we must recom-
pute the mesh at each frame. Extracting a sur-
face from a volume in motion using previous MC 
methods can introduce visual perturbation when 
the surface crossing a MC cell changes, requiring 
a different triangulation. For example, Figure 3a 
shows some MC triangulation cases. Note that the 
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. Material mapping. Each particle represents a portion of a tissue with different characteristics. 
Applying an external force onto a particle (black arrow) will propagate the effect. The gray particles represent 
a rigid body, which is a rigid cluster of particles.

===== [22] PAGE 4 =====
	
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications
27
triangulation may differ considerably from one 
case to the other.
The mesh extracted for rendering must always 
enclose all the body’s particles. Based on this prem-
ise, we developed a method to avoid retriangula-
tion until a cut occurs. Figure 3b illustrates the 
MC grid and the particles’ positions; only in this 
initial configuration are all the cell edges aligned. 
Figure 3c illustrates a situation after an external 
force is applied (arrow) that changes the particle 
positions. This eventually changes the resulting 
surface (blue polygon). However, the triangulation 
cases for each cell are the same as before, avoiding 
abrupt visual perturbation on the surface.
To compute the MC cells, we need the particles’ 
positions and orientations. The orientation is an 
axis centered within the particle and used to de-
fine the cell edges. It is based on the neighbor-
ing particles, which are defined in the initial body 
construction. Only a cut can change this topo-
logical bind. The intent is to allow cells to reshape 
following the movement of the particles directly 
involved and the surrounding particles.
Initially, the MC grid is regular, as in Figure 
3b; all particles have the same orientation. Dur-
ing simulation, the particle positions change, and 
the orientation is recomputed. The axes remain 
aligned with the cells’ edges after deformation, as 
in Figure 3c. As we mentioned earlier, the goal is 
to continue extracting a surface around the body 
(group of particles) without using a different trian-
gulation. We accomplish this by maintaining the 
isosurface crossing the same edges of an MC cell. 
The surface will bend, following particle move-
ment as the cells reshape, but this results in a 
smooth surface deformation instead of an abrupt 
change. This is an extremely important feature be-
cause human users will notice an abrupt perturba-
tion during simulation and could misread it as a 
medical problem. This intentionally irregular dis-
tribution is a unique peculiarity and a benefit in 
terms of our method’s stability and performance 
compared with finite elements.3 
After the orientation computation (Figure 4), we 
generate the triangular mesh using the MC trian-
gulation cases only on the cells with at least one 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3. Surface extraction from an object formed by a group of particles. (a) The marching cube examples show that 
triangulation may differ considerably from one case to the other. (b) Given the initial configuration, changes in the particle’s 
position may imply the use of different cases on consecutive frames, resulting in visual artifacts if a static grid is used. (c) The 
particle’s movement is followed by the cells, which lets us use the same triangulation to extract the surface.
a
a – b
b
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
 
Figure 4. Computing an orientation (directions) for the cell edges based on neighboring particles. (a) In the initial particle 
distribution, the cells align with the world axis. (b) An external force (arrow) moves the particles, causing them to require a 
new orientation. Three different directions are computed and then averaged to obtain the final orientation. First, a direction 
is computed from the vectors formed with the neighbors. (c) Next, another direction is computed, averaging the previous 
orientations of the neighbors. (d) Finally, when some neighbor particles have been removed during cutting, the component 
corresponding to the blue arrow cannot be computed accurately in the previous cases. Then, the component can be better 
estimated from the cross product of the remaining components.

===== [22] PAGE 5 =====
28	
May/June 2017
Applications
missing particle from the eight possible options. 
Also, for each generated vertex in the mesh, we 
associate the 3D texture coordinate from the par-
ticle that originated the cell edge where the vertex 
is generated.
Interactive Cutting
During laparoscopy surgery, the surgeon manipu-
lates organs and tissues using various instruments. 
We modeled some of these tools (grasper, cautery 
hook, needle tip cautery, and scalpel) and coupled 
the graphical model of the tools with a simpler 
physical model that is used for collision detection. 
This is necessary because the haptic feedback must 
run at approximately 900 Hz to provide a smooth 
feel. Figure 5a depicts one of these tools and its 
collision capsules. 
In the real world, each of these tools is a po-
tential electrode for monopolar electrosurgery. 
In this type of surgery, another larger electrode 
is placed on a large flat area of the body (usually 
the back) to close the circuit. The surgeon uses a 
pedal to activate the selected electrocautery func-
tion when necessary. Upon activation, an alter-
nated current flows through the patient’s body, 
encountering higher resistance at the tool tip lo-
cation. This resistance causes heat to be produced 
inside the living cells. Depending on the type of 
current used, heat is produced at different speeds, 
and a cautery tool can function as a coagulation 
device (slow heat) or a cutting device (fast heat). 
If the intracell temperature reaches 70ºC to 80ºC, 
protein denaturation will occur and coagulation 
(white coagulation) will result. If the temperature 
reaches 90ºC, the cells will lose their water con-
tent (dehydration) but will keep their architec-
ture (desiccation). When the temperature rapidly 
reaches 100ºC, the water contained in the cells 
boils. The subsequent formation of vapor and the 
quick expansion of the intracell volume create a 
cell “explosion,” so the cut effect is determined by 
this vaporization.
Figure 5a illustrates our simulation of this pro-
cess. Heat is produced at the contacting particles 
and dissipates throughout the tissue. The heat 
propagation is governed by
newHeat
dissipation
cond
neighbors
i
i
i
j
j
i
h
h
h
=
+
−
(
)
∈
∑
j
i
t
+
(
) ∆
cond
2
.
The speed of heat generation is empirical in our 
model. However, as with the other parameters, a 
differential model based on physics could be used 
for higher physical accuracy. We modeled each ma-
terial (including muscle, fat, and bone) with a dif-
ferent heat-response threshold. Although we used 
empirical parameters to define these thresholds as 
well, they are physically supported by the material’s 
density and the amount of water present. When 
the temperature reaches the threshold, the particle 
starts to lose mass until it disappears. A cut can 
be made faster by increasing the current passing 
through the tool or on materials with a lower heat 
threshold. Because the electrosurgery process al-
ways removes material, the cut accuracy depends 
on the particle density and tool resolution.
Force Feedback
A Phantom Omni, which also gives force feedback, 
provides the input for the tools. During simula-
tion, a collision test is computed in parallel to al-
low a higher frame rate, which is needed for the 
haptic feedback.
We compute the force feedback as the result of 
all vectors departing from the center of the par-
ticles under collision with the tool and the closest 
point in the tool. Figure 5b illustrates this process. 
The resulting vector direction gives the direction 
of the feedback and the amount of penetration 
gives the amount of force. The force feedback uses 
the same process to handle solids and fluids be-
(a)
(b)
Figure 5. Tool interaction simulation. (a) Particles touching the tool 
receive heat that is transmitted to the next particle. A cut is made when 
a particle hits a specific heat threshold, depending on the material. 
(b) We compute the force feedback (arrows) as the result of all vectors 
departing from the center of the particles under collision with the tool 
and the closest point in the tool.

===== [22] PAGE 6 =====
	
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications
29
cause both are modeled as particles. This allows 
the feedback to account for blood and flesh.
Results
To provide face validity for our methods, we ana-
lyzed common surgery scenarios simulated using 
our framework. Here, we provide an objective as-
sessment of the performance obtained with these 
scenarios, providing visual simulation results for 
each. We also compare our results with those from 
recent previous works.
Surgical Scenario
In our face validation, the goal was to demonstrate 
the proposed approach’s ability to simulate several 
key scenarios in real time (more than 30 frames 
per second). The first scenario, depicted in Figure 
6, consists of a piece of fatty muscle where straight 
cuts are made by varying the electrocautery pa-
rameters. The three different cuts were obtained 
by setting different blends (on/off cycles of the 
high-frequency current) to provide more cutting 
(left) or more coagulation (right). Note the simi-
larity between the cuts in the real photograph and 
in the simulation.
The second scenario provided a testbed for mul-
tiple materials, including bone, muscle, fat, and 
blood (fluid). Figures 7a to 7d show a sequence 
of cutting interactions. The tissue volume is 
built from the Visible Photographic female (VIP-
woman) dataset. We selected the shoulder region 
for this scenario because it contains a variety of 
tissues (bones, fat, and muscle). Each tissue is set 
(a)
(b)
Figure 6. 
Comparing the 
(a) simulated 
electrocautery 
with (b) a real 
photograph. 
Three different 
cuts are 
obtained by 
setting different 
blends (on/off 
cycles of the 
high-frequency 
current): from 
left to right, 
continuous cut 
(100 percent 
and 0 percent), 
blend 2 (80 
percent and 20 
percent), and 
blend 3 (60 
percent and 40 
percent). The 
total amount 
of current must 
be the same 
for all blends, 
so voltage is 
proportionally 
increased in 
blends 2 and 3.
(a)
(d)
(b)
(e)
(c)
(f)
Figure 7. Visual results from a cutting simulation with multiple materials: (a) cutting through muscle and fat 
causes bleeding; (b) after cutting, a grasper pinches the tissue; (c) tissue after multiple cuts; (d) separating 
bone from surrounding tissues; (e) thorax reconstructed from the dataset; and (f) thorax after bone removal. 
In the last two examples (e and f), all the organs and other anatomical structures are present. In all cases, 
everything in the simulation generates haptic feedback and is interactive, dynamic, and subject to cutting. 
Nearly 10,000 particles and 30,000 constraints were simulated in real time.

===== [22] PAGE 7 =====
30	
May/June 2017
Applications
with different response parameters to heat. That 
is, fat cuts easily, whereas bone barely responds to 
electrocautery, allowing a sharp dissection around 
it (see Figure 7d). For the blood-flow simulation, 
drops of fluid are generated at a specific point in-
side the tissue. After generation, blood interacts 
with the other tissues and tools; blood also pro-
duces haptic feedback.
In the third scenario, we demonstrate the level 
of complexity our framework can handle in real 
time. Figures 7e and 7f show screenshots from a 
bimanual interaction with a complete model of a 
thorax. This model was also reconstructed from 
the VIP-woman dataset. It includes the organs 
of the thorax (lungs, heart, liver, and spleen), 
vessels, and musculoskeletal structure. In this 
scenario, we also included heartbeats. The heart-
beats are not intended to accurately simulate the 
heart motion. Rather, we apply periodic particle 
impulses toward the center of the organ, which 
helps demonstrate our framework’s ability to 
handle complex scenarios in real time. (See the 
supplemental online video for a demonstration 
of the dynamic behavior in this scenario: https://
youtu.be/7PxWbHDTgVg.)
Performance
We implemented the simulations for these three 
scenarios using C++ and OpenGL. For the perfor-
mance results, we used an Intel i7 CPU and an 
Nvidia GTX 780 GPU.
Table 1 shows the number of triangles generated 
to render each scene, the number of constraints 
connecting particles, and the number of particles 
describing the soft, fluid, and rigid regions. It also 
shows the total computation time and the time to 
compute the particle dynamics on the GPU.
Table 2 shows that, given the same number of 
elements (particles) in the model, our method 
achieved better performance and scaled better 
than the most competitive previous works.2,9  The 
PBD-based methods, such as ours and the Pan 
method,9 are faster than the FEM, although the 
latter is more physically correct. Interestingly, 
in addition to being the fastest, our simulation 
performance decreases slowly as the model com-
plexity grows, which Figure 8 clearly shows. This 
demonstrates that our approach is scalable.
A
lthough most previous works on simulating 
soft tissue cuts focused on improving the 
performance and accuracy of physically correct 
models, they are only able to handle a single or-
gan or a few small organs at interactive rates. 
Any further improvement will greatly depend on 
Table 1. Complexity and performance values from different scenarios.
Figure
Triangles
Springs
Particles
Frame time
Soft
Fluid
Rigid
GPU (ms)
Total (ms)
7a
74,038
215,323
74,038
5,155
0
22
30
7b
74,038
215,323
74,038
6,582
0
23
32
7c
67,065
189,399
67,065
7,205
0
23
33
7d
21,236
78,624
24,217
0
3,771
21
29
7e
103,288
271,575
99,176
0
0
22
34
7f
55,644
194,262
63,043
6,422
0
22
34
Table 2. Simulation times for our method and previous 
works.* 
Elements
Method
Pan method 
(ms)
Wu method 
(ms)
Our method 
(ms)
2,385
8.1
4.2
4,079
19.3
5.3
13,559
78.2
8.0
40,080
613.3
12.8
*The Wu method2 used composite finite elements, and the Pan 
method9 used PBD to model body dynamics and cutting.
1
10
100
1,000
2,385
 Logarithmic scale (ms)
4,079
13,559
No. of elements
40,080
Pan method
Wu method
Our method
Figure 8. Comparison between our simulation and 
previous works. The Wu method2 used composite 
finite elements, and the Pan method9 used PBD to 
model body dynamics and cutting. Given the same 
number of elements (particles) in the model, our 
performance is higher and scales better. Our method 
is also faster and scales better as the model grows 
more complex.

===== [22] PAGE 8 =====
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications
31
the availability of more powerful hardware. The 
next generation of surgical simulators, however, 
will beneﬁ t more from plausible scenarios that 
are complete in terms of anatomy, behavior, and 
interaction, even if they are not guaranteed to be 
physically correct. 
References
 1. C.D. Bruyns et al., “A Survey of Interactive Mesh-
Cutting Techniques and a New Method for 
Implementing Generalized Interactive Mesh Cutting 
Using Virtual Tools,” J. Visualization and Computer 
Animation, vol. 13, no. 1, 2002, pp. 21–42.
 2. J. Wu, R. Westermann, and C. Dick, “A Survey of 
Physically Based Simulation of Cuts in Deformable 
Bodies,” Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 34, no. 6, 
2015, pp. 161–187.
 3. M. Müller et al., “Position Based Dynamics,” J. 
Visual Comm. and Image Representation, vol. 18, no. 
2, 2007, pp. 109–118.
 4. M. Macklin and M. Müller, “Position Based Fluids,” 
ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 32, no. 4, 2013, article no. 104.
 5. J. Bender et al., “A Survey on Position-Based 
Simulation 
Methods 
in 
Computer 
Graphics,” 
Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 33, no. 6, 2014, pp. 
228–251.
 6. M. Macklin et al., “Uniﬁ ed Particle Physics for Real-
Time Applications,” ACM Trans. Graphics, vol. 33, 
no. 4, 2014, article no. 153.
 7. A. Maciel et al., “Using the PhysX Engine for Physics-
Based Virtual Surgery with Force Feedback,” Int’l J. 
Medical Robotics and Computer-Assisted Surgery, vol. 
5, no. 3, 2009, pp. 341–353.
 8. K.-S. Choi, “Interactive Cutting of Deformable 
Objects Using Force Propagation Approach and 
Digital Design Analogy,” Computers & Graphics, vol. 
30, no. 2, 2006, pp. 233–243.
 9. J. Pan et al., “Real-Time Haptic Manipulation and 
Cutting of Hybrid Soft Tissue Models by Extended 
Position-Based Dynamics,” Computer Animation and 
Virtual Worlds, vol. 26, nos. 3–4, 2015, pp. 312–335.
 10. X. Jin et al., “Meshless Algorithm for Soft Tissue 
Cutting in Surgical Simulation,” Computer Methods 
in Biomechanics and Biomedical Eng., vol. 17, no. 7, 
2014, pp. 800–811.
Iago Berndt is a master’s student in computer science in 
the Institute of Informatics at the Federal University of Rio 
Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Brazil. His research interests in-
clude real-time computer graphics, surgery simulation, and 
3D user interfaces. Berndt has a BS in computer science 
from the Federal University of the Southern Border (UFFS). 
Contact him at iago.berndt@inf.ufrgs.br.
Rafael Torchelsen is an associate professor in the Center of 
Technological Development at the Federal University of Pelo-
tas (UFPel), Brazil. His research interests include real-time 
computer graphics, GPUs, and human-computer interfaces. 
Torchelsen has a PhD in computer science from UFRGS. 
Contact him at rafael.torchelsen@inf.ufpel.edu.br.
Anderson Maciel is an associate professor in the Insti-
tute of Informatics at UFRGS, Brazil. His research interests 
include soft tissue and surgery simulation, virtual reality, 
and human-computer interfaces. Maciel has a PhD in com-
puter science from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
(EPFL). Contact him at amaciel@inf.ufrgs.br.
Contact department editor Mike Potel at potel@wildcrest
.com. 
Read your subscriptions through 
the myCS publications portal at 
http://mycs.computer.org.
IEEE-CS
CHARLES BABBAGE 
AWARD 
CALL FOR AWARD NOMINATIONS
Deadline 15 October 2017
ABOUT THE IEEE-CS CHARLES BABBAGE 
AWARD
Established in memory of Charles Babbage in 
recognition of significant contributions in the field 
of parallel computation. The candidate would have 
made an outstanding, innovative contribution or 
contributions to parallel computation. It is hoped, but 
not required, that the winner will have also contributed 
to the parallel computation community through 
teaching, mentoring, or community service.
AWARD & PRESENTATION
A certificate and a $1,000 honorarium presented to a 
single recipient. The 
winner will be invited 
to present a paper 
and/or presentation 
at the annual IEEE-
CS International 
Parallel and 
Distributed Processing 
Symposium  
(IPDPS 2017).
NOMINATION SITE
awards.computer.org 
AWARDS HOMEPAGE
www.computer.org/awards
CONTACT US
awards@computer.org
